Conventional wisdom has it that “load shedding is destroying the economy.” But how damaging are rolling blackouts to the economy? Is it possible to put a number on it? And, if the number is large, what does it mean for the country’s future prospects? The answer is not as straightforward as it might seem. Depending on who you ask, the cost of rolling blackouts for 2022 could be anywhere between R70-billion (Eskom) or R560-billion (CSIR). Or, if you factor in all of its secondary effects, you could be talking in excess of R3-trillion according to one leading economist consulted for this article. Let’s start with the “short-term” calculations on the losses directly attributable to rolling blackouts in 2022, the country’s worst year of rolling blackouts so far. (2023 is on track to surpass this by a handsome margin.) There is little consensus on how to arrive at a number, with a range of methods being used. But most appear to hover around the R400-billion to R600-billion mark. Here are some of them: Visit Daily Maverick’s home page for more news, analysis and investigations While the raw cost of rolling blackouts due to the interruption of production is high, the multiplier effect this has on the whole of society makes the true impact totally devastating. Arriving at the true number is nearly impossible. Pan-African Investments and Research Services CEO Iraj Abedian says there are critical differences between calculating the “short-term costs” and the “medium to long-term costs” The calculations made by economists quoted above assume that “the nature of disruption was short-term/transitory/unexpected/exogenous. “In this approach, the econometric estimates focus on “forgone output/income” — and that is a sound approach.” However, these calculations ought to factor in “the non-pecuniary costs: human loss of lives, cost of impairment due to accidents, malfunctioning of healthcare instruments” among other things. This is the approach taken when estimating the cost of a sudden catastrophic event such as a hurricane or earthquake. But Abedian believes there are costs that go beyond these estimations. These “medium-to-long-term costs are significantly higher. “When load shedding becomes chronic and systemically orchestrated, then the above approach to the quantification of costs is problematic and indeed misleading. SA’s load shedding (power shortage) is not exogenous, nor is it unexpected or unpredictable. Technically, it is endogenous, highly expected and predictable with high degree of confidence. For 15 years, engineers and management insiders have informed us, ministers and presidents have cautioned us that we have a system that is old, ageing and facing growing unpredictability and dysfunctionality. Yet, the government has insisted to do nothing and do the wrong thing for the sake of being seen to be doing something. “The story is well-documented and none other than President Ramaphosa has been at the centre of technical and managerial briefings for over 10 years or so. The upshot is that load shedding has turned into an endogenous and intentional policy failure over a decade or more. In the process, the economy and the society have borne the rising cost of this highly preventable outcome.” The analogy, says Abedian, is that of a patient identified with early symptoms of curable cancer. “The physician knowingly abstains from taking the curative action, instead engaging in a blend of ideological, religious and ancestorial beliefs. By so doing, the physician enables the spread of cancer, and as the symptoms become more evident, the physician continues on the stubborn course of denying the known medical interventions.” Calculating the true cost of this chronic failure over 15 years requires considering: Says Abedian: “The emphasis has to be on socio-human costs and the systemic damages to the fabric of the society;  and not merely on financial damage — important as that one is. The failure to focus on societal damage is that it allows the politicians to pretend as if it is all about money and pecuniary damage so that they can say sorry and move on!” Even if it was all about money, and hardware, the recovery process will take years, given the years of neglect and dithering. Repairing the governance system — the software of procurement and coal contracts — is much more difficult. It demands political change in the character of the ruling party or of the party itself. DM Mills and Hartley are with The Brenthurst Foundation.