The French-Italian-Americans are coming. Almost 30 years after Fiat and Alfa Romeo pulled out of South Africa due to apartheid, the brands are reinvesting in the country under the umbrella of automotive group Stellantis, which also owns Citroën, Jeep, Opel, Peugeot and Abarth. The multinational has announced plans to develop a manufacturing facility in South Africa, in an as-yet-undeclared Special Economic Zone. On Wednesday, Stellantis signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Industrial Development Corporation (IDC) and the Department of Trade, Industry and Competition (DTIC) to develop a manufacturing plant in SA, as part of its “Dare Forward 2030” ambition to sell a million vehicles by 2030, with 70% regional production autonomy. The move will help strengthen the group’s position in the local market, with the manufacturing project to be completed by 2025. The signing ceremony, which took place at the office of DTIC Minister Ebrahim Patel, was attended by Tshokolo Nchocho, CEO of the IDC; Stellantis Middle East and Africa chief operating officer Samir Cherfan, and Leslie Ramsoomar, Stellantis SA’s managing director. “This is an important step in our ‘Dare Forward 2030’ strategic plan towards strengthening our leadership in the Middle East and Africa region and becoming a major player in South Africa,” said Cherfan. “The manufacturing site in South Africa will be a new building block in our industrialisation strategy that includes the plan to sell one million vehicles in the region by 2030, with 70% regional production autonomy, and will bring us closer to our customers’ needs in the region.” Visit Daily Maverick’s home page for more news, analysis and investigations The manufacturing plant, which is planned for a Special Economic Zone (SEZ), will be completed by 2025. Stellantis could be targeting any one of these SEZs or existing Industrial Development Zones (IDZ), namely: Stellantis already has industrial operations in nearly 30 countries, serving consumers in more than 130 markets. Stellantis was formed in January 2021 through a merger of the French-based PSA Group and Italian-American conglomerate, Fiat Chrysler Automobiles. Its headquarters are in Amsterdam. BM/DM