The banks all agree that there are four ways to fund your solar installation: This is probably the least attractive option given that personal loans carry high interest rates. Under the National Credit Act, the maximum interest rate on personal loans (unsecured credit) is 28.25% a year. The remaining three options involve the use of your home loan facility. The maximum interest rate on home loans is currently 19.25%. These interest rate caps change every time the repo rate changes, and we are currently in a rising interest rate cycle. This applies if you have extra funds that you have paid into your home loan, over and above the required monthly instalment. Not all home loans include this facility, so you need to check with your bank first. This is where you have an existing home loan with the bank and you want to apply for the funds you have already paid into the home loan – the difference between your original loan amount and the outstanding balance. For example, your initial loan was R2.5-million and the outstanding balance is now R1.9-million, so you want to access the R600,000 you paid in. You may also have registered a higher amount than the actual loan when you made the initial loan application, and you could apply for the difference in the form of a re-advance. For example, you registered a loan of R3-million but then only took out a home loan for R2.5-million and you now want to access the remaining R500,000. This means increasing your current home loan, provided there is sufficient equity in your property. You will have to pay a registration cost for this and, depending on your credit profile, the bank may change the interest rate you pay. After this article was first published in the Money Cents newsletter, we received reader feedback. While some felt the estimates were understated, a few were astonished at how high the estimates were, and a third cohort said they were relieved to see the quotes they had received were “in the ballpark”. There are a number of variables including the size of your home, how much electricity you use and how much you are willing to spend. If you have feedback on how your solar solution and costs compare to those in this article, please mail moneycents@dailymaverick.co.za as we plan to write a follow-up article.