The international Forex broker OctaFX recently announced expanding its operations in South Africa. The broker built its expansion campaign around making trading easier to learn and practise. Here are three key things South African investment aficionados need to know about the broker and its offering. OctaFX is a broker with over 11 years experience in the financial markets. Frequently lauded and awarded by major financial media, it combines the versatility of investment approaches with its technological inventions, such as its trading platform—OctaTrader. This allows OctaFX traders to streamline their decision-making and make investing more efficient and quick. The broker offers modern, fast-paced investing for those who want to profit even in the bearish market. With OctaFX’s 230 CFDs, such as currency pairs, commodities, stocks, cryptocurrencies, and indices, traders can open short orders as easily as long ones. With no commissions, fees, or swaps, the broker has the best conditions in the South African market. This became possible due to its internationality and client-oriented approach. Spread-only brokerage model enabled OctaFX to offer the most competitive asset prices and make investing more attractive for people in over 150 countries where it operates. Education has always been one of the top priorities of the broker. Only in 2022, OctaFX’s financial experts held over 700 webinars and workshops in 6 languages, while the broker’s YouTube channel grew to more than 980,000 subscribers. Apart from that, OctaFX has a comprehensive Forex course consisting of educational articles on trading, analytics, and other important financial topics—all to make trading clear to everyone, regardless of their investing background. ‘We’ve been looking to expand in the vibrant South African investment market for a long time, and now, fortunately, we’re available to many more people there. We are excited to meet our new clients from South Africa,’ the OctaFX press office commented. DM/BM About OctaFX OctaFX is a global broker providing online trading services worldwide since 2011. It offers commission-free access to financial markets and a variety of services already utilised by clients from 150 countries with more than 12 million trading accounts. Free educational webinars, articles, and analytical tools they provide help clients reach their investment goals. The company is involved in a comprehensive network of charitable and humanitarian initiatives, including the improvement of educational infrastructure and short-notice relief projects supporting local communities and small to medium enterprises. On a side note, OctaFX has also won more than 50 awards since its foundation, including the ‘Most Reliable Broker South Africa 2022’ award from Global Business Review Magazine and the ‘Best Global Broker Asia 2022’ award from International Business Magazine.