Top seed Iga Świątek was bundled out of the Australian Open fourth round on Sunday, 22 January, with title threat Coco Gauff also exiting in tears as a pair of underestimated Grand Slam champions tore open the women’s draw. Third seed Stefanos Tsitsipas avoided a similar fate on the men’s side later in the day, raising his level when needed to claim a thrilling 6-4, 6-4, 3-6, 4-6, 6-3 win over Italian Jannik Sinner and keep his dreams of a maiden Grand Slam title alive. “It was a long match. I feel like I’ve spent a century on this court,” Tsitsipas said of the match, which lasted just more than four hours. “It was a ripper, as they say here. I can feel my face burning from the effort today.” World No 1 Świątek was sent packing by Elena Rybakina in the early match at Rod Laver Arena, the Pole falling 6-4, 6-4 to the Kazak Wimbledon winner who started her tournament in the Melbourne Park wilderness of Court 13. Rybakina shrugged off the scheduling snub before the fourth-round showdown but used it as fuel in her first appearance on centre court as a tightly wound Świątek slowly unravelled. “I felt the pressure, and I felt that I don’t want to lose instead of I want to win,” said Świątek, who dominated last season with two Grand Slam wins. “I felt like I took a step back in terms of how I approach these tournaments, and I maybe wanted it a little bit too hard.” The result means this year’s Australian Open will be the first Grand Slam tournament in the open era where the top two seeds in both the men’s and women’s singles draws have lost prior to the quarterfinals. Rybakina, the 22nd seed, might have expected to face Gauff in the quarterfinals but the much-hyped American teenager was upset 7-5, 6-3 by Jelena Ostapenko, the forgotten Grand Slam winner of women’s tennis. The 2017 French Open champion thrashed 30 winners past Gauff on Margaret Court Arena, her last two sealing the match in style to leave the 18-year-old in tears at her post-match media conference. “I feel like it was rough,” Gauff told reporters, before breaking down with emotion. “When you play a player like her and she plays really well, it’s like, you know, there’s nothing you can do.” The win secured a first Australian Open quarterfinal for hard-hitting Ostapenko, as well as the first at a Grand Slam since her run to the Wimbledon semifinals in 2018. Visit Daily Maverick’s home page for more news, analysis and investigations Latvia’s first — and only — Grand Slam champion stunned the world when she hoisted the trophy at Roland Garros as an unseeded 20-year-old. She has had mostly lean years since but never doubted she would return to the spotlight again. “My life changed a lot [after the 2017 French Open], so I needed a few years to really get used to what happened because I was really young,” she said. “I always knew and believed in my game. If I play well, I can beat almost anyone.” At a tournament fast running out of star power, unheralded Czech Jiri Lehecka landed another blow for the lesser lights as he toppled Canadian sixth seed Felix Auger-Aliassime 4-6, 6-3, 7-6(2), 7-6(3) in the men’s tournament. The 21-year-old next plays Tsitsipas, seeking revenge for a loss to the Greek in the Rotterdam semifinals last year. “He’ll know what my strengths are. He’ll feel I can get him under pressure,” Lehecka said. While Lehecka was a bolt from the blue, big things have been expected of Sebastian Korda for some time and the young American is finally delivering on expectations at Melbourne Park. He took another step towards emulating his Australian Open-winning father Petr by booking his first Grand Slam quarterfinal with a see-sawing 3-6, 6-3, 6-2, 1-6, 7-6, (10-7) win over Hubert Hurkacz at Rod Laver Arena. Korda, whose father won the 1998 title under the Czech flag, showed impressive composure as Polish 10th seed Hurkacz roared back to level the fifth set tiebreak at 7-7 by winning four consecutive points. Korda held firm, closing it out with a backhand winner to set up a clash with Russian 18th seed Karen Khachanov. “It feels awesome. I was not feeling too much energy towards the fourth and fifth sets but you guys picked me up,” the 29th seed told the crowd. Khachanov had a much easier passage, hammering Japan’s Yoshihito Nishioka 6-0, 6-0, 7-6(4) at John Cain Arena. The Russian has now reached the quarterfinals at all four Grand Slams. “Obviously, yeah, that gives me some kind of compliments on what I achieve so far, and I’m just happy to do it. Hopefully, I can continue even further on even bigger things,” he said. Although the high seeds have been tumbled, American Jessica Pegula has been rock solid, and she reached her third consecutive quarterfinal at Melbourne Park by beating Czech 20th seed Barbora Krejčíková 7-5, 6-2. Third seed Pegula will face Victoria Azarenka for a place in the semifinals. Azarenka reached her first Australian Open quarterfinal in seven years as she fended off China’s Zhu Lin 4-6, 6-1, 6-4 in the early hours of Monday. Azarenka, twice a winner of the title in Melbourne, started slowly and lost the opening set but stormed through the second to take the fourth-round match into a decider. Reuters/DM (Reporting by Ian Ransom and Shrivathsa Sridhar)