Four months into the job, Premier Panyaza Lesufi used his inaugural State of the Province Address, delivered at the Johannesburg City Hall on Monday evening, to acknowledge and provide solutions to one of the province’s thorniest issues — crime. Last year, Gauteng recorded the second-highest number of multiple murders in South Africa, with other crimes also on the rise. Early in his address, Lesufi said: “Today, let’s openly admit, our province is a home of heartless and merciless criminals. They do as they wish. If this situation is left unattended it will be the end of all of us.” Lesufi said he wished he did not have to deliver the address as residents had lost confidence in the provincial government. “They think we talk too much and do less. My preference would have been to take you to different sites of Gauteng to showcase the work we have done. Let me assure you, we will talk less and do more. “So the issue of fighting crime should be our apex priority. We should unleash all our resources at our disposal to tackle crime. To this end, we are increasing our budget for fighting crime from R750-million to multibillion[s] in the next three years.” Although the plans fortified many of the promises made by Lesufi’s predecessor David Makhura, details on where the funds would come from were scant. Lesufi announced the following measures to tackle the scourge of crime: Lesufi acknowledged that to bring his plans to life three areas of the province’s legislation needed to be revamped: On illegal guns, Lesufi announced the province had collaborated with the private security industry and found a way to locate the guns anywhere in the country. “Those with illegal guns are now playing god. They decide who lives and who dies. Together with the private security industry, we have found a solution that will assist in tracking stolen guns and locate them wherever they are in our country. We will firstly migrate our law enforcement agencies’ guns in this system, then members of the public.” Visit Daily Maverick’s home page for more news, analysis and investigations The premier also revealed that the province’s current number plate system had been running out of numerals and letters. He said they would capitalise on this crisis by introducing hard-to-copy and tamper-proofed number plates. A Government Gazette was released on 17 February for consultation and comments on new security features. This new system, according to Lesufi, would also assist in managing the abuse of temporary number plates. “We call upon SADC to create a new database of all vehicles within the region so that we can have a common verification platform. “We have also issued strict instructions to our law enforcement agencies to pull off those who continue to drive cars without number plates or fraudulent temporary permits. The abuse of fake blue lights is on the increase. A special unit to eliminate this phenomenon is being assembled.” DM